# Exercise 22 - What Do You Know So Far?

## Python REPL

Python has a REPL (Read, Evaluate, Print, Loop) environment which can be used to test ad-hoc pieces of Python code. The Python REPL can be invoked by typing `python` at the terminal, without passing any arguments:

```bash
$ python
```

## Python Scripts

Python scripts have a `.py` file extension.

A Python script can be executed by typing `python` at the terminal, passing the file path as an argument:

```bash
$ python ./hello_world.py
```

## Python Modules

Python modules are essentially Python files that contain a collection of related attrubutes and functionality. For example, the `math` module contains functions for performing mathematical operations beyond the basic arithmetic operators. We can make use of a module's functionality by importing it into our script.

We can import all of a module's attributes and functionality using the `import` keyword:

```python
import math
```

Or we can import specific functionality by combining `from` and `import`:

```python
from math import sin
```

## Comments

Python uses the `#` character to denote comments in a script. It is also possible to use a multi-line string literal to create multi-line comments:

```python
# This is a comment
# The Python interpreter ingnores comments
# Comments are useful for explaining complex code or things that aren't obvious from the code itself

# Comments can occupy an entire line
def add(a, b):
  return a + b # or be placed at the end

# They are also useful for disabling a piece of code
# print(add(40, 2))

'''
multi-line string literals
can also be used to
create comments
'''
```

## Data Types

### Numbers

Python has three number data types - We have covered two so far.
| Type | Description | Example |
| - | - | - |
| `int` | Represents integer numbers - whole numbers, positve, negative and zero | `-42`, `0`, `42` |
| `float` | Represents floating point numbers - numbers with a decimal or fractional component | `-42.0`, `42.4242`, `3.141` |

### Boolean

Python has a boolean data type that represents truthiness or falsiness. A boolean can be a value of `True` or `False`. Comparison operators evaluate to a boolean value and boolean values are used extensively in conditional and flow control statements.

### String

The string data type represents a sequence of characters, e.g. `"Hello, world"`. String literals are delimited by either double (`""`) or single (`''`) quotes - enclosing quotes must match.

It can be useful to use one type of quotes to enclose a string literal when you need to use the other inside the string:

```python
is_he = "He isn't!"
what_she_said = 'She said, "We ride at dawn bitches!"'
```

Sometimes you'll need to use both in which case you can use escape sequences:

```python
what_she_said_next = 'She said, "It\'s fair windy! Ride\'s off!"'
```

Escape sequences allow us to encode difficult to type characters into a string. Some common escape sequences include:
| Sequence | Description |
| - | - |
| `\\` | Backslash |
| `\"` | Double quote |
| `\'` | Single quote |
| `\n` | New line |
| `\t` | Horizontal tab |
| `\uxxxx` | 16-bit unicode hex vlaue |

## Keywords

Keywords or reserved words have special meaning within a programming language. Keywords can't be used as identifiers (the name of a variable, function, or class etc).

| Keyword          | Description                                     | Example                                                                 |
| ---------------- | ----------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `def`            | Declares a funcion or method                    | `def add(a, b):` - Declare a function named add                         |
| `import`         | Imports a module                                | `import sys` - Import the `sys` module                                  |
| `from`, `import` | Import a member from a module                   | `from sys import argv` - Import the `argv` member from the `sys` module |
| `return`         | Concludes function execution, returning a value | `return a + b` - Return the result of the expression `a + b`            |
| `None`           | Represents the absence of a value               | `value_not_yet_known = None`                                            |

## Arithmetic Operators

Python supports arithmetic operations. Arithmetic operators are binary operators and operands can be numeric literals, variable names, or expressions. Python follows the expected arithmetic order of operations when evaluating expressions (think PEDMAS).
| Operator | Description | Example |
| - | - | - |
| `+` | Addition | `40 + 2` |
| `-` | Subtraction | `44 - 2` |
| `*` | Multiplication | `21 * 2` |
| `/` | Division | `84 / 2` |
| `%` | Modulo | `142 % 100` |

## Comparison Operators

Comparison operators allow us to compare values, returning `True` or `False` based on that comparison. They are binary operaters and the operands can be literals, variable names or expressions.

| Operator | Description           | Example                                                      |
| -------- | --------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `==`     | Equal to              | `1 == 2` - Is `1` equal to `2` (`False`)                     |
| `!=`     | Not equal to          | `'Yes' != 'No'` - Is `'Yes'` not equal to `'No'` (`True`)    |
| `<`      | Less than             | `0 < 42` - Is `0` less than `42` (`True`)                    |
| `>`      | Greater than          | `0 > 42` - Is `0` greater than `42` (`False`)                |
| `<=`     | Less than or equal    | `42 <= 42` - Is `42` less than or equal to `42` (`True`)     |
| `>=`     | Greater than or equal | `41 >= 42` - Is `41` greater than or equal to `42` (`False`) |

### Variables

Variables are used to store values that can be used throughout the execution of a script.

In Python, we create variables by giving them a name (declaration) and assigning them a value (assignment):

```python
my_name = 'Richard Lambert' # create a variable called my_name and assign it the value 'Richard Lambert'
my_age = 37 # create a variable called my_age and assign it the value 37
```

If the value of a variable is not known when created, we can assign the special value of `None` which represents the absence of a value:

```python
we_dont_know_yet = None
```

Python is a dynamically-typed language meaning that variables are not bound to a specific data type. For example, we can declare a variable and initially assign it an `int` value, and then update it to store a `string` value later on - just because you can, doesn't mean you should:

```python
my_age = 37 # declare my_age and assign the value 37
my_age = 'thirty-seven' # reassign my_age the value 'thirty-seven'
```

We can then access the value stored in (referenced by) a varibale by its name:

```python
print(my_name) # prints Richard Lambert
print(my_age) # prints 'thirty-seven'
```

When naming variables, there are rules we must follow and conventions whe should follow:

- Names can only contain the characters `a-z`, `A-Z`, `0-9`, and `_`.
- Names can't be a Python keyword.
- Names can't begin with a number.
- Names can't contain spaces.
- Names should be "snake case", e.g. `my_name`, `my_age`, `is_open`.
- Names should be descriptive, e.g. `current_user` instead of something like `cu`.

## Functions

Functions are named, reusable blocks of code that can accept values (optional), do work (also technically optional), and return a value (implicitly or explicitly).

Some benefits of functions include:

- Reusability - Once a function has been defined, we can use it as many times as we need within our script.
- Readability - Abstracting away repeating code by encapsulating it within a function means that we [avoid repeating ourselves](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Don%27t_repeat_yourself).
- Maintainability - If we need to update what a function does, we only need to do so in one place, regardless of how many times it's used in our script.

It's useful to think about functions in terms of defining them and calling them. When we define a function, we are stating what values we can pass into it, what it does, and what values it returns when it has finished doing its work. When we call a function we are making it do its defined work.

The the bare-minimum syntax for defining a function is:

```python
def greet():
  pass
```

The `def` keyword starts the function definition. We then give our function a name, in this case `greet`, followed by opening and closing parentheses (`()`) and a colon (`:`). The body of the function, the part that defines what the function does when called, then follows. All the statements you want to be part of your function body must immediately follow and be equally indented. In the absence of any actual functionality, when you're setting up for example, you can use the keyword `pass`.

Optionally, functions can accept values (arguments) when called. The values a function can accept are included as part of the funciton definition:

```python
def greet(name):
  pass
```

Here we are saying that the `greet` function accepts a single value (argument) when called. Within the function definition, this value is referenced or accessed using `name`. Think of `name` as a variable that is declared and used within the function definition and given a value whenever the function is called. Opening and closing parenthesis (`()`) are required, even if the function accepts no arguments.

A function also returns a value when it completes its work. We use the `return` keyword to explicitly return a value:

```python
def greet(name):
  return f"Hello, {name}!"
```

If we don't explicitly provide a `return` statement in our funciton definition, it will implicitly return `None`.

## Getting Help

### Python Documentation

The [official Python documentation](https://docs.python.org/3/) has beginner tutorials, language and sytax explainers, and reference material for components of the [Python Standard Library](https://docs.python.org/3/library/index.html).

### Google

When researching a new builtin, module, or package, googling `python <name>` is often a good start.

### pydoc

The `pydoc` module is used to generate documentation form Python source code and also provides information on built-ins, modules and packages. `pydoc` can be accessed from a terminal using:

```bash
$ pydoc <name>
```

```bash
$ python -m pydoc <name>
```

### help()

From the Python REPL, typing `help(<name>)` will output information on built-ins, modules and packages. Typing `help()` will start an interactive help session.

```bash
>>> import math
>>> help(math)
Help on built-in module math:

NAME
    math

DESCRIPTION
    This module provides access to the mathematical functions
    defined by the C standard.

...
```
